Before verifying the three promoters, we did an optimization of the lactate-induced promoter by directed evolution. Based on the above principle of lactate manipulator, we used different promoter and RBS combinations instead of lldR promoter (figure2a). The response of lactate promoter mutant strains R1_V1 to R1_V10 was characterized by the normalized fluorescence intensity of mRFP. The results showed that R1_V10, the original version with hyperspank and spoVG, had the best fold change (figure 2b). We proceeded to test the response of R1_V10 to lactate and the results showed that it can respond to 10 mM lactate levels. Among others, LB broth does not interfere with the mRFP fluorometric measurement (figure 2c).


We then tested pH and hypoxia reporters, and the results not only showed that they can respond to conditions, but also indicated that E. coli Nissle 1917 is more suitable as a chassis organism compared to E. coli DH-5alpha (figure 3).

After confirming that promoters can respond to the signal properly, we start to verify the functionality of the switch. We compared the three promoters followed by mRFP with the strains with the addition of switch under the corresponding conditions of induction. According to the results as followed, by comparison, we can conclude that the addition of the amplifying genetic switch enhances the reporting strength and robustness of the biosensor (figure 4).

We then co-cultured the engineered microbes with murine colorectal cancer cell lines CT26, and human colorectal cancer cells RKO and SW480, this time our engineered microbes are equipped with three biosensors and switch (XOR gate) followed by HlyE, respectively. Meanwhile, there were also strains transferred to only three promoters and HlyE parts were available as controls. From the results as followed, we can draw the conclusion that OR gate can enhance promoter-induced toxicity protein levels, and engineered microbes controlled by inducible promoters express active proteins only under low lactic acid and low pH conditions (figure 5)